add const-ub RFC (#3016)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/0000-const-ub.md

- Feature Name: `const_ub`
- Start Date: 2020-10-10
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> Define UB during const evaluation to lead to an unspecified result for the affected CTFE query, but not otherwise infect the compilation process.

Reviewer: Should this mention that the `unspecified result` can be a hard error?

> Define UB during const evaluation to lead to an unspecified result or hard error for the affected CTFE query, but not otherwise infect the compilation process.

Author: Should I make it explicit that running into internal compiler errors is *not* an acceptable reaction to CTFE UB, i.e., if there are errors, they must be "proper diagnostics", not "exceptions"? I am not entirely sure how to word this though.

Reviewer: That's unnecessary imo, as the compiler team already treats all ICEs on stable as bugs and requires the minimal fix to be to at least hide the ICE via a proper error or by delaying it.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

So far, nothing is specified about what happens when `unsafe` code leads to UB during CTFE.
This is a major blocker for stabilizing `unsafe` operations in const-contexts.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

There are some values that Rust needs to compute at compile-time.
This includes the initial value of a `const`/`static`, and array lengths (and more general, const generics).
Computing these initial values is called compile-time function evaluation (CTFE).
CTFE in Rust is very powerful and permits running almost arbitrary Rust code.
This raises the question, what happens when there is `unsafe` code and it causes [Undefined Behavior (UB)][UB]?

The answer is that in this case, the final value that is currently being executed is arbitrary.
For example, when UB arises while computing an array length, then the final array length can be any `usize`, or it can be (partially) uninitialized.
No guarantees are made about this final value, and it can be different depending on host and target architecture, compiler flags, and more.

> However, UB will not otherwise adversely affect the currently running compiler; type-checking and lints and everything else will work correctly given whatever the result of the CTFE computation is.

Reviewer: I think it should be noted that the behaviour is also deterministic, because if it were not, that would be adversely affecting the compilation.

Reviewer: Yes. The point I was trying to convey but failed is: You don't see two different values of the same constant within a single compilation. Like two crates A and B evaluating a constant defined in C will give the same result, so that D (which depends on A and B) does not end up with a broken type system.

Other kinds of UB are ignored, and evaluation continues as if there was no error.
* Dereferencing unaligned pointers: memory is accessed at the given address even if it is insufficiently aligned.
* Violating Rust's aliasing rules: memory is read/written even if that violates aliasing guarantees.
* Producing an invalid value (but not using it in one of the ways defined above): evaluation continues despite the fact that an invalid value was produced.

`rustc` also currently makes no attempt at detecting library UB.

No UB-exploiting MIR optimizations are currently being performed for CTFE, so a CTFE execution currently will never go wrong in arbitrary ways: UB is either detected, or evaluation continues in a well-defined manner as described above.

However, this is just a snapshot of what `rustc` currently does.
None of this is *guaranteed*, and `rustc` may relax or otherwise change its UB checking any time.

[UB]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/behavior-considered-undefined.html

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

> When UB arises as part of CTFE, the result of this evaluation is an unspecified constant, i.e., it is arbitrary, and might not even be of the right type.

Reviewer: I don't understand what "might not even be of the right type" means.

Author: "might not be valid for the result type" is a better way to put it

Reviewer: Yes, that is much better. The constant's type field will never be affected by CTFE (at least not by the execution that evaluates the constant's value).

The compiler might be able to detect that UB occurred and raise an error or a warning, but this is not mandated, and absence of lints does not imply absence of UB.
However, the rest of the compiler will continue to function properly, and compilation *itself* will not raise UB.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

This means UB during CTFE can silently "corrupt" the build in a way that the final program has UB when being executed
(but not more so than if the CTFE code would instead have been run at runtime).

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

The most obvious alternative is to say that UB during CTFE will definitely be detected.
However, that is expensive and might even be impossible.
Even Miri does not currently detect all UB, and Miri is already performing many additional checks that would significantly slow down CTFE.

> Furthermore, since optimizations can "hide" UB (an optimization can turn a program with UB into one without), this means we would have to run CTFE on unoptimized MIR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, since optimizations can "hide" UB (an optimization can turn a program with UB into one without), this means we have to keep running CTFE on unoptimized MIR.
```

Furthermore, implementing these checks requires a more precise understanding of UB than we currently have; basically, this would block having any potentially-UB operations at const-time on having a spec for Rust that precisely describes their UB in a checkable way.
In particular, this would mean we need to decide on an aliasing model before permitting raw pointers in CTFE.

To avoid the need for keeping the unoptimized sources of `const fn` around, we could weaken the requirement for detecting UB and instead say that UB might cause arbitrary evaluation results.
Under the assumption that unsound code is not subject to the usual stability guarantees, this is an option we can still move to in the future, should it turn out that the proposal made in this RFC is too expensive.

Another extreme alternative would be to say that UB during CTFE may have arbitrary effects in the host compiler, including host-level UB.
Basically this would mean that CTFE would be allowed to "leave its sandbox".
This would allow JIT'ing CTFE and running the resulting code unchecked.

> While compiling untrusted code should only be done with care (including additional sandboxing), this seems like an unnecessary extra footgun.

Reviewer 2: Another alternative would be to not allow any unsafe operations in constant contexts

Author: That is backwards-incompatible -- we already allow some unsafe operations in `const`/`static` bodies.

Reviewer: we have in fact allowed this since before miri, we just didn't allow you to use them for anything transmute-like (you were only able to read from a union field if you also wrote to that union field)

Basically this would mean that CTFE would be allowed to "leave its sandbox".
This would allow JIT'ing CTFE and running the resulting code unchecked.
While compiling untrusted code should only be done with care (including additional sandboxing), this seems like an unnecessary extra footgun.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

C++ requires compilers to detect UB in `constexpr`.
However, the fragment of C++ that is available to `constexpr` excludes pointer casts, pointer arithmetic (beyond array bounds), and union-based type punning, which makes such checks not very complicated and avoids most of the poorly specified parts of UB.
The corresponding type-punning-free fragment of Rust (no raw pointers, no `union`, no `transmute`) can only cause UB that is defined to be definitely detected during CTFE.
In that sense, Rust achieves feature parity with C++ in terms of UB detection during CTFE.
(Indeed, this was the prime motivation for making such strict UB detection requirements in the first place.)

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

Currently none.

# Future possibilities

> [future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

Reviewer 3: I think it might be useful to add a `--fewer-ctfe-ub-checks` flag at some point in the future. This flag would allow running CTFE on optimized MIR, but would relax the guarantees about which kinds of UB would be detected. This would only change the behavior of incorrect code, and could speed up compilation for users who have audited their unsafe code.

This would need additional design work to be properly integrated with cargo (something per-crate would be better than `RUSTFLAGS="--fewer-ctfe-ub-checks"`), but I think it would be good for the RFC to leave the possibility open.

Author: Thanks, I added that.

- Feature Name: `const_ub`
- Start Date: 2020-10-10
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Define how UB during const evaluation is treated:
some kinds of UB must be detected, the remaining UB conditions are ignored and evaluation continues in a well-defined way.
However, CTFE queries causing UB are not subject to stability guarantees and thus may fail to build in the future (e.g. when more UB is being detected).

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

So far, nothing is specified about what happens when `unsafe` code leads to UB during CTFE.
This is a major blocker for stabilizing `unsafe` operations in const-contexts.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

There are some values that Rust needs to compute at compile-time.
This includes the initial value of a `const`/`static`, and array lengths (and more general, const generics).
Computing these initial values is called compile-time function evaluation (CTFE).
CTFE in Rust is very powerful and permits running almost arbitrary Rust code.

> This begs the question, what happens when there is `unsafe` code and it causes [Undefined Behavior (UB)][UB]?

Reviewer 4: nit: "This raises the question.", not [begs the question](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Begging_the_question).

Author: Yeah I felt I have seen "begs the question" before in various contexts, but I can still easily fix this to "raises the question" and try to remember this for my future writing. ;)

Reviewer 4: > I forget where I read it or I'd link it, but there's a strong argument that, in cases like these, the battle has already been lost and it does nobody any good to fight English's natural evolution toward simplicity and intuitiveness.

I claim that in clear writing, one should simply avoid the phrase entirely. Otherwise you're going to confuse people who *do* associate the phrase with its original meaning.

Reviewer 5: In a formal document, meant to last, of course. You want to avoid ambiguity wherever possible... but, in less formal or more transient contexts, people are *going* to use it that way.

Had you said something like "nit: 'begs the question' is ambiguous. Should be 'raises the question'." so your intent in saying it wasn't ambiguous, I wouldn't have had a problem with it.

The answer depends on the kind of UB: some kinds of UB are guaranteed to be detected,
while other kinds of UB might either be detected, or else evaluation will continue as if the violated UB condition did not exist (i.e., as if this operation was actually defined).
This can change from compiler version to compiler version: CTFE code that causes UB could build fine with one compiler and fail to build with another.

This RFC does not alter the general policy that unsound code is not subject to strict stability guarantees.
In other words, unsafe code may not rely on all future versions of Rust to implement this RFC.

> The RFC only helps *consumers* of unsafe code to be sure that right now, all UB during CTFE will be detected or non-consequential.

Reviewer 4: what is "non-consequential" supposed to mean here? Does it mean "it actually *is* defined behavior at the moment, and the definition of that behavior is 'the obvious thing' [whatever that means] for the given CTFE expression"?

Reviewer 4: Actually I think the reference section does answer this question, namely "All of this UB has in common that there is an "obvious" way to continue evaluation". I'm not 100% sure I agree that the meaning of dereferencing an unaligned pointer is **obvious** though.

Author: > I'm not 100% sure I agree that the meaning of dereferencing an unaligned pointer is obvious though.

Maybe I can word this better; suggestions are welcome. From the perspective of a formal spec or a Miri-like interpreter, alignment constraints are of the form
```rust
if something_is_wrong { raise_ub; }
/* go on */
```
So there is an "obvious" way to continue evaluation even when something is wrong: just skip the `if` and go on without raising UB.

This is in stark contrast to e.g. OOB memory accesses, if we do not raise UB, we'll simply ICE later since we'd index a `Vec<u8>` (representing this memory allocation) beyond its bounds.

@pnkfelix suggestions for better wording are welcome. :)

Reviewer 4: @RalfJung let me put it to you this way: does the part labeled `/* go on */` explicitly mask out the bits causing mis-alignment, so that the resulting address *does* obey the alignment constraints?

Because the heart of my complaint is that I don't know whether the "obvious" interpretation of an unaligned access is to implicitly mask out the bits to get the desired (e.g. word) alignment, or if it is to access the two neighboring words and then combine their bytes to construct the "word" that was denoted by the misaligned address.

Author: > Because the heart of my complaint is that I don't know whether the "obvious" interpretation of an unaligned access is to implicitly mask out the bits to get the desired (e.g. word) alignment, or if it is to access the two neighboring words and then combine their bytes to construct the "word" that was denoted by the misaligned address.

Ah, interesting. The option of doing such masking never occurred to me.

In the interpreter it would be extra work to mask off the "overaligned" bits, so we do nothing like that -- we just read the given number of bytes starting at the given address, ignoring the fact that the alignment constraint is violated. No need to read neighboring things and combine them.

> If you tell me that your intent is that all non-signaled cases of UB will be handled in some similar specified manner, then I'll be happy.

Looks like we should do that then. ;) What would be the place for such documentation though?

Reviewer 4: > Ah, interesting. The option of doing such masking never occurred to me.

(The most common place in my career when I have encountered misaligned pointers was when there was some form of type tag embedded in the value. Its pretty common in dynamic language runtimes. That's where the masking interpretation originates for me.)
